(Clapham railway station,Clapham railway station
 
 
 
Clapham railway station serves the village of Clapham in North Yorkshire, England. The station is   north-west of Leeds on the Leeds to Morecambe Line towards Lancaster and  Morecambe. It is managed by Northern Rail who provide all passenger train services.The station (which is unstaffed) is situated just over a mile outside of Clapham.   Immediately to the east, the line crosses the River Wenning on a tall five-arch bridge.The station was formerly known in the national timetable as Clapham (Yorkshire), to distinguish it from Clapham (London), until the latter was renamed Clapham High Street.
HistoryThe station was opened by the "little" North Western Railway (NWR) on 30 July 1849 on their line from Skipton to Ingleton and became a junction the following year when the link along the Wenning Valley from Bentham was completed on 1 June 1850  to finish the route from Lancaster to Skipton.The Ingleton route was subsequently extended northwards, as the Ingleton Branch Line, through Kirkby Lonsdale and Sedbergh to join the West Coast Main Line at   (near Tebay) by the Lancaster and Carlisle Railway (L&C) in 1861, but disagreements between the L&C's successor, the London and North Western Railway, and the Midland Railway (who had leased the NWR in 1859) over running rights and the subsequent construction of the Settle-Carlisle Line, meant that it never became the major Anglo-Scottish route that the NWR had originally intended.The Ingleton Branch was closed to passenger traffic on 1 February 1954 and completely in July 1966,  although regular goods traffic had ended some months earlier. Lifting of the track followed in April 1967.  A sharp curve (with a permanent 35 mph speed restriction) marks the site of the former junction, immediately west of the station.The station ceased to handle goods traffic in 1968, when the remaining sidings were taken out of use & dismantled and the station signal box closed.
ServicesMonday to Saturdays, five trains a day head from Clapham eastbound to Leeds and westbound to Lancaster and Morecambe.  On Sundays there are now four trains each way all year, an improvement on the previous level of two each way all year plus a further two return workings in the summer months only.
Notes 
References

Binns, D (1982) The 'Little' North Western Railway, Wyvern Publishing, Skipton. ISBN 0-907941-01-X
Marshall, J (1981) Forgotten Railways North-West England, David & Charles (Publishers) Ltd, Newton Abbott. ISBN 0-7153-8003-6


Gallery 
Image:Claphamstationsign.jpg|The station sign at Clapham railway station
Image:Claphamstationbridge.jpg|Bridge and westbound platform
File:Clapham (North Yorkshire) station geograph-3109754-by-Ben-Brooksbank.jpg|The station in 1986
File:Clapham (North Yorkshire) station geograph-3109768-by-Ben-Brooksbank.jpg||The station in 1986
 
External links 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  DEFAULTSORT






)
