(Yoko Gushiken,Yoko Gushiken
   is a Japanese former professional boxer from 1974-1981.  His professional record is 23-1 and he held the title of WBA Light Flyweight champion 1976-1981. Following his retirement from boxing, he remains popular in Japan as a tarento having signed a contract with Ohta Productions.   Gushiken is part of the 2015 class for the International Boxing Hall of Fame. 
BiographyGushiken was known for having strong stamina, allowing him to pressure opponents into mistakes after many rounds.  His southpaw stance allowed him to take advantage of many mistakes, usually by throwing unexpected combinations of punches instead of waiting for counterpunch opportunities.His popularity centered in mainland Japan, where he was known by the nickname Fierce Eagle and crowds were normally sold out.  He quickly rose through the amateur ranks and won All-Japan in high school.
WBA Light Flyweight ChampionshipAfter that, he went pro and fought for the WBA Light Flyweight crown after just nine professional fights.  He defeated Juan Antonio Guzmán, a well-seasoned pro, by knockout in the seventh round.  He held the championship for over four years.  In thirteen defenses, he won eight by knockout.Panamanian Jaime Rios nearly defeated Gushiken in 1977 and 1978, but lost after wilting in the last rounds of each match.  Other defeats of note were against future champions Alfonso Lopez and Rafael Pedroza. As with Rios, they lost after many rounds of being worn down by Gushiken.In his thirteenth title defense, he fought Mexican Pedro Flores, winning by a close margin.  In the rematch, Florez was better at reserving his energy and defeated Gushiken by knockout in the twelfth round.  Many expected Gushiken to return to the ring, but he announced his retirement five months after his loss.
TarentoDespite retiring from boxing in 1981, he remains a popular figure in Japan. As a tarento he has appeared on countless variety and quiz shows,  including "Cream Quiz! Miracle 9" where he is a regular. 
See also

The Gushiken Family of Okinawa
List of WBA world champions
List of light flyweight boxing champions


References 
External links

 
Shirai-Gushiken sports gym official (Japanese)
The memorial hall of Yoko Gushiken

 
 
 
 
 
   
DEFAULTSORT









 )
