(Nalgonda,Nalgonda
 
 
 Nalgonda ( ) is a town and district headquarters of Nalgonda district in the Indian of Telangana. It is a municipality and also the mandal headquarters of the Nalgonda mandal in Nalgonda reveneu division. 
Etymology
Its name is derived from two Telugu words: nalla ("black") and konda ("hill").  Nalgonda in the past was referred to as Nilagiri. During the period of the Bahamani kingdom, it was renamed as Nallagonda.  Later in Nizam rule, during the later kings rule, the name was transformed into Nalgonda (for official uses).
History 
 
Nalgonda or Nilagiri is a place of residence from ancient times. In the old city center, there is an Ashoka pillar. The panagal village was the city center in Kakatiya period where exquisite and highly artful temple of emerald someswara, Chaya someswara temple, and a Venkateswara temple are found. The sculpture of emerald someswara temple is par excellence and highly skillfully carved pillars demonstrate the artisans' mastery as well as devotion. It is said that the temple is called emerald someswara temple because it was endowed with an emerald, which filled the entire temple with light reflected from it in day and night. Its structure follows trikuta architecture style with main sanctum of Shiva and sanctum of Parvati placed opposite, and sanctorum of Skanda placed on the right of main sanctum. The temple for some time was in ruins with many villagers pilfering some of the stone carvings, carting away to their huts or residences. Archaeological society of India, however, later on tried to protect the temple with a fence, and the temple stands in its glory with its pillars intact.Similarly the Chaya someswara temple is an architectural wonder, where any time in day or night a column of shadow is seen exactly on the deity Shiva without any change throughout the year. Also, the temple's main deity always rests in water skillfully drawn from a nearby lake called panagal cheruvu. The whole construction and water circulating arrangement is as thought the deity is endowed with cool environs. The lake is also said to be very old with a silasashana giving its origin. Main interesting feature of the stone carvings is that the script on it is Brahmi script, indicating its very ancient origin.Nilagiri is also endowed with two hills, where on one ill there is a fort, and another hill of huge rock of granite where a temple is seen. This hill on its one side has a huge rock of smooth surface embellished with rectangular indentures for help walking on it to reach the temple. Another interesting feature of this hill is there is large reservoir of water inside a hollow of the rock on another side with small opening to be seen as if water is stored by some one in a pot of giant size. At all times of the year it is filled to the brim.The hill with the fort is called Kapurala (family residential) gutta, indicating that the families of the rulers were kept safe as this hill is very steep on all sides. This fort also has a very deep well as if to supply water for the residents for a long time.
Paleolithic AgeDuring this period, people fashioned tools and weapons by chipping hard stones of convenient size and shape. This feature is testified by the findings of unifacial Paleolithic implements of the Sloan type at Yellowhammer.
Neolithic AgeTraces of Neolithic culture were found at Chota Yelupu, where sling stones and other objects of interest were unearthed. The existence of Megalithic culture was revealed by the discovery of innumerable burials at various places like Tipparti, Nakrekal, Nalgonda.
Mauryas and Satavahanas (230 BC – 218 BC)The political history of the district commences with the Mauryas. Mauryas, during the reign of Ashoka the Great, held their sway over this region. Later the region came under the overlordship of the Satavahanas, who ruled between 230 BC and 218 BC. It was during this period that the region established trade contacts with the Roman empire.
Ikshvakus (227–306)The Ikshvakus attained control over the region. During this period, Sakas and tled in the region. Buddhism flourished during this period. Iksvakus are one of the greatest dynasties ever ruled.
PallavasAfter the Ikshvakus, Pallavas and Yadavas fought for supremacy over the region. Luck favoured the Ikshvakus in the form of Samudragupta's invasion of the South. 
RashtrakutasA major portion of the district appears to have passed from the Chalukyas of Badami to the Rashtrakutas. Rashtrakutas fell in 973 and gave room to the Chalukyas of Kalyani. The sway of the Chalukyas continued until the end of the 12th century.
Medieval periodThe district passed under the control of the Kakatiyas from the western Chalukyas. During Prataparudra II's time, the kingdom was annexed to the Tughluq empire in 1323. During Muhammad bin Tughluq's period, Musunuri chief Kapayanayaka ceded a part of Nalgonda to Ala-ud-din Hasan Bahman Shah. During Ahmad Shah I's period the region was annexed to Bahmani kingdom. Jalal Khan in 1455 declared himself king at Nalgonda, but it was a short-lived affair. The region was brought back to the Bahmani kingdom.QutubshahiDuring the time of the Bahmani Sultan Shihabud-din Mahmun Sultan Quli was appointed as tarafdar of Telangana region of present-day Telangana state. From him the region was taken by his son Jamshid. Later the district remained under the control of Qutub Shahis until 1687.
Modern period: Mughals and Asaf JahisNizam-ul-Mulk (Asaf Jah I) defeated Mubasiz Khan at Shaker Khere in Berar and ruled the Deccan in an autonomous capacity. This district, like the other districts of Telangana, passed under the Asaf Jahis and remained under them for a period of nearly two hundred and twenty-five years.
GeographyNalgonda is located at  .  It has an average elevation of  .
Demographics   census of India, Nalgonda had a population of 135,744.
GovernanceNalgonda municipality is a Grade–I municipality. It was a Grade–III municipality when it was constituted in the year 1941. The jurisdictional area is spread over an area of  .  While, its urban agglomeration is spread over an area of   which includes constituents of Nalgonda municipality, out growths of Nalgonda (rural), Panagallu (rural), Gollaguda (rural) and partial outgrowths of Arjalabhavi, Gandhamvarigudam, Massiguda. 
TransportNalgonda railway station is a major railway station located on Pagidipalli-Nallapadu railway line. It falls under the jurisdiction of Guntur railway division of South Central Railway zonw.
NeighbourhoodsSome of the religious sites are Lateef Saheb Dargah, Jain Shrine of Kolanupaka Temple, are located in Nalgonda. Neighborhoods to the city are Nagarjuna Sagar masonry dam, Ethipothala waterfalls, Gowthama Buddha Museum and Bhuvanangiri Fort built by Tribhuvanamalla Vikramaditya VI on an isolated.
Education
As being district headquarters Nalgonda serves as a hub for primary and secondary education for surrounding villages. Nalgonda has many primary and upper primary schools which offers Telugu Urdu and English as medium of instruction. Nalgonda district has Engineering and Medical colleges and vocational colleges. Mahatma Gandhi University is the only university in Nalgonda. There are also professional colleges for engineering, pharmacy and science providing education in different fields. Some of them include, Nalgonda Institute of Technology and Science,  Ramananda Tirtha Engineering College,    Swami Ramananda Tirtha Institute of Science and Technology.  There are many schools and colleges in the city which has state government operated education institutions. One of them being Nagarguna Government Degree college. 
See also

Nalgonda (Assembly constituency)

References 
External links 

Nalgonda Municipality
   
 
 
 
)
